because this might be interesting.
Let me just put this over here.
They had a big signing at Barnes & Noble on Friday last week for the three winners of the book award, and there were a lot of people there, and we signed a lot of books, but a whole bunch of people kept coming up with stacks of like five of the hard covers, which were extremely hard to find.
What did I get your thoughts between these two?
We have sparkling water with lemon.
I'd like hot coffee.
Ready?
I'll bring those right after you.
So first of all, I was curious where they'd gotten the hard coffees, because there aren't any, because it was a very small printing.
They must have been doing this.
They were.
And second of all, I was curious as to why they had five.
I thought they were just in their own people.
You know, I know you like to read, but what's going on here?
And she said that already a first edition, there was a small second printing, and I guess it has to be the first printing.
A signed first edition is $85.
So she brings me a $20 book, and I sign it, and she has an $85 book.
Oh, it's with one of them.
But that's okay.
Yeah, it is okay.
It was so weird.
I never thought about that.
I don't...
I mean, I'm sort of aware people collect contemporary first editions, but it's not my world, and so this is news to me.
But in fact, my guess also is that your earlier books are worth even more now.
Well, people, it turned out... See, you can probably explain a lot of this to me.
Of course, everyone's bringing in their earlier books in preference for the old hardcovers, all of which are out of print.
But they seem most teased...
to have gotten their sort of cruddy-looking review copies or advance copies of the old books, and they wanted those signs.
From their perspective, even though, to my eyes, they're not nice to touch, I guess because they're rarer, maybe, because there are fewer of them.
They seem pleased to have these.
I personally have no interest in that.
These are the galley groups, right?
Yes.
In some instances, they represent a variant state.
Did you do many corrections on your values, for instance?
Oh, I'm not one of these people who rewrites really heavily, but sure, I mean, I correct typos and a few lines.
So therefore it represents an earliest state of the work.
So what Clark is always looking for is the earliest possible state.
And of course the fact of the scarcity, it's automatic scarcity.
Somebody like Stephen King...
let's say, you know, whose first editions are maybe issued at a million copies.
Right, and there's only a thousand galleys, I suppose.
There may not even be that many.
The galleys are usually pretty consistent, maybe three or four hundred, if there are that many.
Oh, that's interesting.
So that's the drive for people.
Yeah, but authors like Updike and Tyler do revise to the point that even...
I forget which Tyler novel it was, they actually had to issue a second set of proofs because she had revised it so heavily and it had different color of paper so I think it's the accidental tourists first state proof and second state proof, you know, but uh the only reason I mentioned this times thing is I believe I'm going to feature your book as an example of what an award can do. Oh how fun
Because they asked me to kind of take a look at new books.
And then I said, well, will you look at the bestseller list and see?
I said, that's kind of an oxymoron.
I mean, there's nothing collectible on the bestseller list that I can possibly see.
I'd be happy to comment on it, you know.
But how has the National Book Award changed your life?
Maybe we can just enter the conversation.
Well, I suppose in ways that were utterly predictable to everyone but me, but not predictable to me.
Did you want to?
She has to go across the street to some books in a while, so maybe it would be a good idea.
So we were talking about... Yeah, about that.
You know, it's changed a lot of things in ways that I just had no idea.
I'd never done a book tour, for instance.
I mean, this is my fifth book, but I never went on a book tour.
I was very out of sort of this kind of way of publishing a book.
I had a lovely editor and nice publishers, but I was always published quite quietly, pretty small editions.
Ten thousand books was a lot of books for me, and the times that they published ten thousand, they didn't sell them all.
Sometimes they didn't even come close.
So this is just like another world.
Do you know what your, what your, how many copies of the earlier books were published, just out of curiosity?
Um, it varies from book to book, but the, um, the first one was issued as a paperback original, and it was, yeah, and that's the one that, from a collector's point of view, people, it's out of print, it was an original, people are like, So it's never been in cloth?
No, never, so people come up to me now with this little pattern thing in the plastic bag, if they can find it, um,
And it was used as the lunch book for what was then a new series called Delta.
It was sort of Delacourte's version.
I think they may have printed twelve of that.
They were very hopeful for that, because they were trying to start off this new line.
Twelve thousand?
Twelve thousand, yeah.
And I was a new writer, and it was a new line.
And for a first book it was nice.
I don't think they sold all those, but they did okay.
And after that it was sort of downhill.
I read someplace that you trained as a zoologist.
Is that correct?
Yeah.
I went to—I did an undergraduate degree in biology and very— Which is where?
Where was this?
Union College in Schenectady.
And went extremely briefly to a Ph.D.
program in zoology at UMass Amherst.
But by extremely briefly, I mean like six weeks.
I didn't even get close to making it through my first semester.
I was so not cut out to do that.
And what would you have done as a zoologist?
What I wanted to do and what I didn't understand and I couldn't do, I wanted to do what Alfred Russell Wallace had done or what Bates had done in the Amazon or what Darwin had done in the Galapagos.
Really?
Yeah, really.
You know, I thought that
What I wanted to do was natural history, and I didn't understand that that wasn't what 20th century biology was about.
I wanted to go off on a sailing ship and go someplace and discover birds and name them all.
I was so naive.
I was very young.
It was my only excuse.
Why do you say naive?
That sounds like a nice dream.
Why not?
Why not dream about something like that?
Yeah, it was a good dream, but when I got to graduate school, I realized
There's big equipment, and people want me to design experiments and cut molecules and do genes and keep a laboratory no-fucking.
So the romantic element of it wasn't there?
Actually, 20th century science is romantic in its own way, but it's not a way that is accessible to me.
My husband is a structural biologist, works with very large equipment.
and very tiny things that are invisible to see.
And he does this in industry, or he teaches?
He's at the University of Rochester Medical Center.
He just does research.
He does X-ray crystallography.
You know what that is?
Nope.
Say it once again for my tape.
It's X-ray crystallography.
Okay, X-ray crystallography.
And you've seen pictures of the double helix.
You know, besides the two strands that twine around, there are all those little balls, and those little balls are the atoms that go together to form the molecule.
And crystallography is a technique of determining how the atoms are fitted next to each other in three-dimensional space, both how they lie next to each other and then how those strands curl, or in some molecules...
You know, they bunch, they clump, they lump, they do all sorts of things.
It's neat.
Why don't you have some of your salads?
I don't either, so I'm not proud.
I mean, that's very romantic, and I love learning about that, and I love watching him do it, and tons of my friends are scientists.
But all of that science is, at its core, really mathematical.
You and I can talk about it metaphorically and visually,
Neither of us can do the math, I'm guessing.
I really have a hard time understanding it, too.
Oh, it's the same salad dressing.
It is.
That's good.
I have a hard time with math, and I'm also not very analytic at all.
I think if I have a strength at all, it's probably that I'm a good synthesizer.
I don't know anything deeply or well, but I know a lot of things lightly or shallowly, and I'm capable of synthesizing things from improbably distant disciplines sometimes.
But I don't actually know any discipline, and that's not a good trait either for a scientist.
But you certainly use this knowledge and these perceptions.
Yeah.
And it was fun getting back to it.
Tell me how that happened.
Yeah.
It came from a couple different directions.
I had written four novels back-to-back, a little atypically.
I had not started my writing career making stories and then trying to edge my way up to a novel.
I started writing a novel, and that's how I taught myself to write.
That's very interesting that you come to the story.
Yeah, I know.
I do everything backwards.
I really do.
So I spent about six years trying to teach myself to write.
by writing a novel over and over and over again.
It was a horrible novel.
I had to throw it out.
But that's what I learned to write on.
Starting about when?
About 1978.
You were young?
Well, I was, but I felt old.
I'd always been in a hurry.
I was 16 when I went to college.
I was 19 when I got out of college.
And then I was in and out of graduate school twice, and I had
I once figured out thirteen jobs in ten years, and I felt really quite battered.
What kinds of jobs?
Oh, the worst.
I worked in a greenhouse.
I worked only for three days as an assistant to a dental surgeon, but I fainted nine times the first day.
I faint when there's blood around.
It was not a good job.
So you took the job knowing that you faint when there was blood.
Well, I didn't know.
I didn't know there was going to be so much blood.
And I was really desperate.
I was so broke then.
I worked in a box factory.
I worked at all kinds of secretarial jobs and clerical jobs.
I worked in a college development office.
I typed tax forms for three Swedenborgian accountants.
I just did everything.
And this is after having graduated from college in nineteen?
Yes.
I mean, you must have been— I couldn't do anything.
An exceedingly bright young woman.
You're nice to say so, but if I was, I was certainly one with no skills.
And also, I got out of college in nineteen seventy-four.
You may recall there was a big recession.
There was no work, especially for someone who couldn't, I mean, I really had no skills.
So did you just kind of come to writing?
Or was it something that you always enjoyed or aspired to?
Did you write as a kid?
Not so much.
Did you know that you had ability in it?
No, I read passionately and wildly since I'm a tiny, tiny girl.
My mother taught me to read somehow before I went to kindergarten.
which was actually at Brown Street Elementary School, which is probably bulldozed now, but used to be about half a mile from here.
And I just read omnivorously, but it wasn't the kind of family and we didn't lead the kind of life that it was even really possible for me to think the thought that I could be a writer.
I didn't meet a writer, a living writer, until I was 28, 29.
I went to a small high school on Cape Cod that was then in a sort of semi-rural area.
There was no arts programming.
Where was this on the Cape?
We moved to a lot of different places, but we were then living in Centerville.
I went to Barnstable High School, which now is very civilized.
They have lockers.
They have gym classes.
But none of this was true when I was there.
Not so many people went on to college from that place when I was there.
I don't know, I just wasn't imaginative enough, I guess, to conceive that one could be a writer, and I loved biology, so that's what I did.
People would say, why don't you be an English major?
You love to read so much.
I was like, but I'm going to college, and it costs all this money, and I do this anyway, and I love it so much, and so I should learn something that I can't do, which, of course, now seems to be the height of stupidity.
In fact, I never had an English course in college, and I regret this so passionately.
Now, I never learned Shakespeare with a great teacher.
I never did the English poets with a great teacher.
All my life, I'm Captain Dink.
Do you regret it?
That's very interesting.
I'm working on a new book.
Pardon me for just making it up.
And I'm going to consider the Canada Wars.
It's just one chapter.
And, of course, now...
You can get a degree in English literature without being required to study Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer.
Well, you'll pardon me, but I'm old-fashioned.
I think that's just wrong.
It's unbelievable, isn't it?
Yeah.
And here you are bemoaning, you weren't even an English major, and you bemoaned on having studied Shakespeare.
Well, I...
I had to do that all by myself.
Which I consider the greatest course I had.
It changed my life, I can say.
Really?
Studying Shakespeare.
I love it when people say that.
But a lot of people do.
They say, you know, in the hands of a really wonderful teacher, if anyway you love books and you're sensitive to language, to do things like read Paradise Lost or The Great Tragedies with a Good Teacher is transfiguring.
And I missed all that.
I read Paradise Lost for the first time three years ago.
And
It was transfiguring, and in a way it's great to come to it as an adult with all the things you already know.
It's blindingly beautiful, but how lovely, too, to have been led through that by a real Milton scholar, by someone who can really open that up.
I missed all that.
I missed that.
And I think to come to it again as a novel is even sweeter, because you have been ushered
guided through it by, you know, having a Virgil to walk you through.
I miss that Virgil.
It seems to me a real deprivation to deny people that experience when they're young.
I mean, I know people feel really passionately about this in the other direction, that, you know, it's sort of the dead white guy thing.
We shouldn't have to do that.
Dead white European males, is what they call it.
Yeah, I know.
And yet the things that shaped me as a writer are
No Proust, no Tolstoy.
No, I mean, that's what shaped me.
Because I didn't have a teacher, and I didn't have a guide, and I didn't know from women's literature, and I didn't know a lot of things, really the things I read in those kind of formative years.
You know that part in your life where just whatever you read sticks with you for the rest of your life?
If people understood this more clearly, they'd be really careful about what they let their children read.
And I think of those years as being sort of 12 to 19 or so.
And what I read then was all the Russians, you know, all the Tolstoy, all the Dostoyevsky, the Proust, the Thomas Mann, the Conrad, the Forster, the Ford Maddox Ford.
And that's probably why I sold fashion.
I mean, that is in the absence of teachers or English courses.
That's what sort of shaped my sense of language.
and sound, and maybe that's bad in certain ways.
It probably is bad in certain ways.
I just wasn't exposed to anything else.
But those are really wonderful writers.
They're certainly worse models.
How old were you when you were reading these songs?
Oh, I'd probably say 12, 11, yeah.
It's too young, I think.
It's wonderful.
I don't think so.
I have her two daughters.
My old daughter is 15, and she stuns me.
Not only what she reads, but how quickly she reads.
Yeah, we're like animals, and we're that old.
I'm a professional reader, and she reads twice as fast.
I think it's because if you start at a very early age, and she's reading adult books, and you get concerned about it every once in a while.
I do.
Oh, you shouldn't.
You really shouldn't.
Well, there was one book I didn't interview, which was Woman, Sapphire, called Push.
Thought I'd worry about.
And I said, jeez, Barbara.
I said, I don't know if I would.
That's rough.
She said, trust me.
And I have to trust her.
Yeah, you do.
And the fact is, that book, I liked it.
I'm probably the only middle-aged white man you're going to see to say that.
But I really like the fact that there is a... That's very powerful.
There's a very triumphant aspect to it where this...
young woman, this girl, is going to make it through reading, through this awareness of reading.
And I think she did a wonderful job of traumatizing that at that point.
I really do.
I was quite moved by it.
But anyway, I was concerned that my daughter must pick reading about this.
girl who was raped by her father and had two children by him.
I mean, I know why people worry, but I remember reading The Painted Bird when I was 14 or something.
That's a really grim book.
But I don't think it hurt me, really, to read it.
It scared me and frightened me and made me sad, but it didn't hurt me.
I did an interview in New York a couple months ago with Scott Turow.
I've interviewed him forever.
I like Scott.
We were talking about the same stuff, and I asked him the same question.
What do you think about Georgetown?
It was Georgetown that started this.
The English major doesn't have to study anything that the English major doesn't want to.
And he said, I'll do you one better.
He's an alum of Amherst College.
Just the idea that it brings into question what it means at all to have an education, to say that you're an educated person, especially to come from a place like Harvard.
Or Amherst, because Harvard did not go in with that, you know?
I mean, Union is a wonderful school, and it was a very happy place for me, and I learned a lot, but in many ways I would have to say that at least in the world I live in now, I don't have an education, and I'm constantly trying to repair that.
I sometimes feel like a Visikoff, who's sort of been let inside the gates.
I teach at conferences and sometimes in graduate programs with
such good writers who are both wonderful writers and also have what you and I would think of as a real literary education.
So I'm very sharply aware all the time of all the things I don't know and how much I still have to learn.
I learn a great deal from teaching with them, but it abashes me too to be sent out in the world without the education.
It's no one's fault but my own.
But you are teaching yourself so many different things.
The reading list that you already described to me, that's a lot of self-education.
i mean like all autodidacts i have surprising corners of erudition and equally surprising horrifying omissions and gaps you can teach yourself a lot and i'm very grateful for the things that i've learned but you can't teach yourself everything it's really nice to know other people who are
smart and we'll teach you things.
Let's go back then also again to the development of the fiction writer.
You were working on this novel.
The one that was published, is that the one that took six years?
No, I had to throw the whole thing out.
I had a sort of Cinderella story.
I was so lucky.
Writers, too, you can teach yourself to write up to a certain point and you can go quite a long way, but at some point somebody's got to hold out a hand and help you or you're in trouble.
The way that hand got held out to me, I worked on this novel for about six years.
When I started, I really couldn't write a sentence.
I didn't know where to put quotation marks.
I didn't know how to indent.
No, I'm not kidding.
You know, it's a big issue for me.
Do they go inside the period, outside the paragraph?
I knew nothing.
So six years later, I went up to Bread Loaf, which is a writer's conference up in Vermont.
As a student, I had a novel in my purse, the famous six-year novel, like everyone does who goes to a conference.
And I also had a story that I had just started that seemed a little better.
And I had two very nice teachers.
One was Nicholas Delbanco, who's a quite wonderful writer who's been running the writing program out at Ann Arbor, but was then at Bennington.
And the other was Thomas Gavin, who was teaching at the University of Rochester, which is where I ended up living, although that's just coincidence.
And they were very sweet to me.
Nick said, oh, that's a pretty good story.
Have you ever written anything else?
I said, well, I have this novel in my purse.
And he said, well, let me take a look at it.
And he took it home, and he actually read it in one night, which only now that I teach at conferences myself do I realize how extraordinary that was.
It was incredible.
And he sat me down the next day and did really the kindest thing I think any human being has ever done for me.
He said, look...
You're really talented.
You can probably do this if you want, but you're never going to be able to save that novel.
It's what you learn to write on.
It's not a good idea.
The pieces are never going to fit together.
You need to just chuck that and move on.
What a piece of advice that was.
But he was right.
And also now that I teach, I realize how extraordinarily hard it is to give that advice to someone.
It's very hard to look a young person in the face.
you know, that you know has worked that long, and tell them the truth, which is what they need to hear, I'm not sure I could do it.
But, you know, I went home and cried for a day, and then I threw it out.
And this was six years of work.
It was six years of work.
As far as I was concerned, it was my whole life.
And I threw it out, and I started writing Lucid Stars, which was my first published novel, and I wouldn't have written it if he hadn't done that.
And then how did that come to be a published work?
By then, Nick and I stayed friends, and also Tom and I, and
They both, without pay, and when they were both much too busy, they would let me mail things to them and look at them and sort of write letters back and tell me, oh, it's okay, it's okay, keep writing.
And they introduced me to Wendy Weil, who has been my agent since then and still is, and is a very nice and lovely agent.
And she was able to find a home for it.
I was incredibly lucky.
And the first publisher, I think, was Delta?
It was Delta, a very good editor named Jane Rosenman, who was starting up this line that she's moved several times since then.
I think she's the executive editor now at Scribner's, but was then a young editor at Delacorte.
And she bought the first one.
And she stayed with me through four books.
She was also very kind to me.
So you left with the stories for Norton?
Actually, she left.
We were together at Delacorte for two books, and then she moved to Pocket, and I went with her.
But when she moved from Pocket to Scribner's, it was right around the same time that the stories were up, and it just sort of fell between the cracks.
And so I moved to Norton with the stories.
I turned out to be very lucky.
So what were your expectations of the stories?
You know, the honest truth is I'm amazed I sold the book.
It's true.
The way I wrote those stories is right around the time I sold the fourth novel, I got an NEA grant, which just saved my life.
It was so great.
And I realized that if I was really careful, I could probably live for two years anyway for a year.
And that I was never going to have time like this in my life.
Nobody gets that kind of time.
And that I didn't have to churn out another novel.
I didn't have to do something that I had to sell.
I love short stories so much, and I knew I didn't know how to write one.
So it was like my sabbatical.
I said, okay, at least for a year.
I don't care what anybody wants.
I'm just going to write.
There's going to be a training period.
Yeah, I'm going to see if I can teach myself to write a short story.
That's a great story.
I had this idea of her historical novel in mind, so I also wanted to learn to wrestle with historical material, see if I could find some voices and techniques that would let me get into that.
I do want to talk about that, by the way.
But that's all it was.
I mean, I really think of this book as like a laboratory notebook.
It's sort of a record of the experiments that I was making over a couple of years in form and voice and using new contents.
I never set off to make a book.
I was just screwing around.
I was just making some stories.
I mean, not screwing around.
I was working my butt off, but I was doing it for me.
And then the stories led to the novella.
And then, you know, in the bell, it's like, what do you do with it?
Oh, it's everything.
Good.
Can I have some more hot coffee?
Sure.
Oh, it's very good.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, I was just going to say, did you check that?
If you need any more, I'll get you some more.
It's not hot enough.
Let's just see.
I like it hot.
Yeah, well, so do I. That's why I'm out.
It's cold.
Is it all right?
Oh, actually, could you get me some?
Okay, let me see.
So I wrote the novella, and I thought I was going to write a companion novella to go with it, but about a week after I started, I realized I had a huge novel on my hands, and in fact, that's what I'm working on now.
And so then I looked at the novella, and I looked at these stories.
I thought, huh, I didn't really mean to do that, but kind of, sort of, these all seem sort of related.
And there's all these scientists, and what if I wrote maybe one more, and it was another historical one, and then I could sort of do old story, new story, old story, new story.
I mean, contemporary story, history story.
Maybe I could make a little book.
So I made a little book, and I brought it to Wendy, and we both shook our heads and thought, ooh, a book of short stories is really hard to sell.
Ooh, dead scientists.
But Wendy's great.
She says, no, it'll work out.
Somebody will take it.
Yeah.
And we were incredibly lucky.
Carol bought it at Norton, and she did a brilliant job with it.
And I was just really, really, really lucky.
Isn't it amazing, huh?
It is amazing.
So what did you think when you were nominated?
Oh, I didn't even believe that.
I would have to believe that was the biggest surprise.
Oh, absolutely.
I'm sitting at home, scribble, scribble, scribble on the new book, and...
Neil Baldwin, who's delightful, called for the National Book Foundation, which, of course, I had never heard of before.
Isn't this great?
And he says, oh, you know, calling.
He says, you know what the National Book Foundation is?
I said, I'm sorry, I don't.
I was going to ask you for money.
I'm so ignorant.
You know, I don't live in New York.
I'm sort of out of the loop and all this stuff.
He says, so I have this really good name for you.
You've been nominated for a National Book Award.
I said, get out of here.
I thought it was one of my friends giving me shit.
I wouldn't believe him for like ten minutes.
He says, no, really.
I said, who is this lady?
I was very surprised.
I still am surprised.
There were a ton of just incredibly good books last year.
Incredibly good books.
Yeah.
Oh, um...
Again, this was just gossip from New York, but someone at the Barnes & Noble signing who came up with a stack said that she had heard they had found a little pod of returns in the warehouse of the first edition, and Barnes & Noble had gotten hold of those, and so they had this little stack.
Nobody was buying the paperback because they had this little stack of real first editions.
This was at Barnes & Noble?
When was this?
It was Friday night.
It was Barnes & Noble Union Square, and they had, I think, 40 copies, and they just went like...
But not, I mean, not really the people, I think, who wanted to read the book.
It was people who know what you know, collector people.
Were people buying multiple copies?
Boxer.
Those were dealers.
Yeah.
Yeah, I have to assume that.
I mean, I can't.
I'm going to do a little research.
I'm going to find out what your book is going for in the open market.
Oh, I would be glad to know.
And, well, I hope this, you know, I wouldn't talk about this at times.
Yeah, I don't do Internet stuff, but my husband's a big computer jock, and he has a great connection at work because he's got an FGI and all the color things, so we can find it at work if you let us know the site.
Well, it's the New York Times site, www.nytimesnewyorktimes.com.
You get the whole newspaper on the screen.
See, I don't even know about it.
Yeah.
Basically, my research now for my new book is I'm doing so much of it on the Internet.
You can get the San Francisco paper.
I wanted to find out about the San Francisco librarian being fired.
Oh, yeah, that whole story.
And that's a great story.
You must have been doing that whole Nicholson-Baker thing about the books.
That was so fascinating.
I've got a story that's even better than that for my new book.
It's up in your neck, which is Cornell, too.
Well, we'll talk about that later.
I'm doing books of the future and libraries of the future and a canon.
This new book is not about collecting.
It's about people, book places, and book culture on the end of the millennium.
And if we don't get it out in 1999, then it'll be at the dawn.
One or the other.
But that sounds so interesting.
And I'm just interviewing hundreds of people.
Yeah.
But there's also the way that he has gone apart.
Just go visit libraries that have been so significant in history.
Go to Pergamum, which was the arrival to Alexandria.
Go to St.
Gaul, which was the most important, and it's still there.
Monastic scriptorium, or go to Monte Cassino, where the rule of Benedict was.
But explain these things, these places, and go along, and then just bring it up to the immediate present.
you know, the brand-new French Library, the brand-new British Library, and then that would be the continuum, one chapter, and I've done a lot of other things.
It's fun.
That sounds great.
That sounds really interesting.
I'm having fun.
But, you know, you see, every author I've talked to... It changed it.
It saved it.
I start that again.
Reading, what?
No, I mean, reading was just everything to me.
I was such an odd little child, and...
I'm so unhappy in so many ways.
It's just constitutional.
It's not that I had this dire childhood or anything.
But really, since I'm tiny, I've never been really happy unless I was reading or later writing, which is even more of a pleasure than reading.
But books really have been my home in a way.
It's like before the Internet or in the absence of the Internet, I was already wired in the sense
You know that I always lived kind of outside my body when I was doing my truest living.
I do my livest living within the covers of books.
It's just true.
Do you see my eyes sparkling?
No, what a stupid thing that I say.
It's so pathetic, really.
But it is true.
But in a way, I despise it.
I mean, we're not just pure... You despise what?
The fact that so much of the heart of my life is in books.
Why do you despise that?
Well, because, I mean, we have bodies.
We're not just pure spirit and pure mind.
We're incarnated in corporeal things.
We live on the earth, and I've always...
Now that I'm older, I do pay more attention to the outside world.
I mean, I do try and experience things more sensually and remember to look at the sky and remember to feel the weather and remember to look at the ocean.
But my natural instinct is just to float in a sea of words.
It's so home for me.
It's such happiness for me.
And then when I finally did learn to write, and this is another way I realized how incredibly lucky I've been,
A lot of writers actually find writing kind of painful.
They like having written and they like thinking about writing, but for some people it's quite excruciating.
It's amazing to me to find that.
I've interviewed about a thousand authors when I graduated over the last 20 years.
It's amazing to me how many really fun it's to be a painter he has.
I love it.
And to me, it's a great release.
Nazi, yeah, you're the same way.
It's like I sit down and... I love to go for drives.
I love to drive to New York because it allows me for three... I don't have cellular phones or anything like that.
Nobody can bother me.
Nothing to think.
for three hours.
And it's without an interruption.
It's just, it's joyful.
I know, it's heaven.
And that's writing for me, too.
Even if you're not writing, you're writing.
Yeah, I write a lot when I'm not writing, and I'm sure you do, too.
And then when you just sit down, it just comes out, you know.
Where did you get your books?
From the library, or when you were a kid?
From the library.
My family's not bookish, although my mother did read to me.
But, um,
I think they always found my taste for books quite, quite odd, but they were not resolutely against it.
And they would drive me to the library.
Some of the places we lived in, I could walk to a library.
When I was really little, we had a bookmobile, which was fabulous, because it came to me.
And the few places we lived where I couldn't walk or bike, somewhat grudgingly, but pretty much always, somebody would get me down there.
Someone was always pulling me out of the room saying, you know, you've been reading for eight hours, go out.
You're going to hurt yourself, right?
You're going to go blind, you know, why are you so weird?
Go out, you know, play with some friends, go outdoors, do something.
But they always had to force me out.
You have siblings?
I have a kind of complicated family.
Yes, lots of siblings, half-siblings, step-siblings.
Were there other kids reading around you, or were you kind of alone in that regard?
My brother and sister are really bright in other ways, but are not huge readers.
They read a little now.
So there's no explanation for why this happened?
No, no, it's not a book family, and it's not like...
You know, two Harvard professors in a house full of books.
It was a family that was anything but bookish.
Everyone's really active.
They're good with their hands.
They're musical.
My brother is actually much better known than I am.
He's a very well-known stringed instrument maker.
He makes Tucker Barrett.
He makes electronic violins and violas and cellos.
He's based in Vermont.
And my sister...
weaves and does architectural drawings.
Well, they're creative people.
Yeah, it's just not in a booky way, but we all are strange, really.
The creative side of the brain is working.
Yeah.
It's funny, it worked out, and all of us were all self-employed, more or less, and we all sort of make stuff.
We just are working really different mediums.
Funny thing.
If we might, it only gets a little time.
What time is it?
It's a quarter or something.
I saw a quote that these stories are about you.
You're interested in the science of love and the love of science.
Oh, yeah.
But it's an interesting quote.
I'm not necessarily asking you to replicate the quote, but why don't we just talk about the thematic concerns?
I think that partly grew out of the fact that
in the early stages of putting the book together or editing it or starting to make the covers.
Someone was saying, well, how do you think of these stories fitting together?
And I just sort of said that in conversation.
But it was only as we began the process of making the book that really that I even realized that to other people to see scientists as sort of
flawed human creatures with lusts and passions and love affairs and strangeness was odd to them.
I forget because I live with a scientist and all our friends are scientists, that people who aren't scientists, there's that kind of stereotype of scientists that sort of
dry and nerdy and geeky and very technological and not capable of messy human emotions, which of course is just craziness.
They're exactly like you and I. Well, yeah.
But I'm sure even Bill Gates has a seamy side somewhere.
I hope so.
Geez, I do too.
Best not to think about that.
It isn't anything more complicated than that, just the idea that they're as twisted as we are.
They fall in love the same way.
They fall in love or not in love with each other and with their work in the same way.
the one influences the other, that science is really driven by all kinds of passions and jealousies and messy intuitions, and it's not dry.
It is an interesting way to examine human nature, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
Which is why, if I may say, when people used to ask me what I'm writing about, I stopped telling them.
I would say, I mean, I'm book collectors.
Oh, that's interesting.
You know, I would get this vacant look.
Yeah.
And I'm really writing about human nature.
I'm writing about passion.
I'm writing about 2,500 years of obsession.
People who have killed for these things.
People who have been killed for them.
And that's all I was doing, too.
I mean, I think what interests us both, but it's hard to communicate until people read the book.
I'm interested in people who are obsessed.
I mean, you happen to be interested in people who are obsessed by making...
and collecting books and doing certain things with them.
And I'm interested in people who are obsessed with ordering and naming the natural world.
But in both our cases, I would guess that it's the obsession that we're interested in.
I mean, I happen to also love the subject matter, but really it's the obsession with the subject matter that draws me.
And my other books are not about science.
Some of them have a good deal of history and then some don't.
But what I think they do all have in common is they're always full of people who are just weirdly obsessed with
one thing or another, the forms of water, the protagonist is an 80-year-old ex-monk with mad obsessions for other things.
So obsession is something that is a classic.
I'm fascinated by people who get seized by something and can't let go.
The second time I was in graduate school, which I also dropped out, stayed longer that time, but didn't finish, I was doing medieval and reformation theological history, which
I realize on the surface sounds like a long way from zoology and a long way from fiction but but it seems to me now looking back that what was drawing me was the same thing I was the thing I was studying was the early history of the Franciscan order and the split that arose in that order between the people who wanted to stay completely poor and have the monastery own nothing and only have someone else go out and buy the shoes and the bread and only live by begging and and
another wing of the order that wanted to, like, you know, we want a roof and just maybe some bread.
It doesn't have to be good bread, but, you know, we want some bread.
Were they a bookish order?
No, they're not in the way, you know, they actually really turned from that idea, from the really austere bookishness, because, you know, too much money, books need a house, books have to be taken care of, you should be feeding the starving with the money, blah, blah, but...
I'm not religious, it's not that that was drawing me, but the level of obsession and intensity with which those people were approaching those problems was very, very interesting to me.
And I guess that's why I get drawn to so many different fields.
What is it about the power of fiction that attracts you?
I mean, you certainly are writing, you could almost be a, I guess it's the fact that you can work with obsession,
You know, you tell me another field where for one set of three years I can study Arctic exploration in the 19th century, and for another set of three years I can study the history of Darwinian evolution, and for two more years I can study the history of China, and for another couple years I can learn, I did learn a great deal of Benedictine history when I was learning the forms of water.
Where else in the world could I do that?
You know, I have an excuse every couple years to just plunge myself into a whole corner of the world.
and try and inhabit the heads of the people who really do it.
The downside is I have very shallow knowledge.
You'd pull me from this, from the knowledge I get in here.
You're nice to say so, but my knowledge is like this deep, but it's really broad.
I know a tiny bit about a shitload of things.
But I like that.
I mean, I don't advocate that as a way to live.
Actually, my greatest respect really is for people who know a great deal about one or two things.
I love that in people.
I love people who are truly scholars, who truly know something the way you know book collecting, who go all the way down, who really get it, who really dig.
I love those books, but I'm not that way.
I'm really interested in the history of the book.
But I can tell you know this.
I mean, you probably really know the history of the book all the way back.
I don't know anything like that.
No, I'm trying to learn more, though.
You know how you feel?
Somebody said to me, well, you've done this book.
What subject are you going to move to now?
I feel like I...
It took me eight years to do that.
I feel like I've been through medical school and residency and I've performed one operation.
You expect me to quit now?
I'm just starting to learn this stuff.
That's so great.
But I happen to love books, and I love book culture.
I love authors.
You've become one of my authors now.
That's how my book started, interviewing authors and all.
having them inscribe a book for me before we're done.
You work with fictional characters here, invented characters, and also summoned authentic figures from the past.
Do you like to talk a little bit about that?
That's kind of a risky thing to do, isn't it?
I don't think it's so risky the way I do it.
The only time I've really used a historical person as a protagonist is in a story called The English Pupil, which is about Linnaeus.
That was either the first or second story I wrote of this group.
I'm really interested in Linnaeus, and I thought, oh, this is so cool what happened to him.
He named things all his life, and then he lost his mind when he was old.
I wrote that, and it was a really interesting experiment.
I like the story, but...
But I felt very confined working on the story because, you know, there's all the facts of Linnaeus' life.
And because I did do a little history seriously, I'm very uncomfortable with changing known facts and dates and places.
I mean, lots of fiction writers will do that sometimes to wonderful effect, but it makes me queasy so I don't do it.
And after I wrote that, I thought, I really don't want to do that again.
What I want to do is...
And try another tack, which I have been doing quite often since then, where I'll set a historical context really strongly and let real people sort of float through the background, but sometimes they pass very slightly through it.
In Rare Bird, Peter Collinson is mentioned.
I mean, I could write a whole book about Peter Collinson.
So they're really almost as props or as... Almost.
I mean, it cheers me in the writing to pop Peter Collinson in there.
Ambience or whatever.
Yeah, I mean, I know who Peter Collinson is, and I know all about his garden and stuff, and nobody else will, so it's just my personal little jolly, but it makes me happy to put him in the garden.
But if I wrote the story about him, I have to stick to the facts of his life, and as a fiction writer...
I'm happier when I have some room to maneuver to be able to set up a set of events or make an arc of action that's fictionally satisfying.
And it's hard for me to do that with real characters.
So since then, I've always chosen the strategy of having a fictional protagonist and usually fictional people immediately around him or her.
and a fictional situation and kind of wedging that in.
It's like you slot it into the historical record.
Sometimes you can find a space of a year or six months and you can just pop and invent anything in there.
Is this a form of historical fiction in your view?
I don't know.
I'm so unclear what that term means.
I think of it as regular fiction.
I guess so.
I mean, because it certainly has a time and a place that you should be working with.
I don't really think of it as historical fiction, but I suppose that's all I... I didn't either.
I'm just... Somebody said this is a new... One of your reviewers said that.
But you don't think of it in those terms.
I don't.
I think of it as fiction that I just happen to be using...
a different set of facts for.
I did a lot of research for the contemporary novels, too.
It doesn't feel different to me.
It just feels like an outgrowth of the same thing.
Do you have a sense of who the reader is at this point?
This is my biggest puzzlement right now.
I mean, to me, these stories, I had so much fun writing them, but I'm such an odd person.
You're such a what?
I'm such an odd person, and I read such odd things.
I mean, really, I was surprised someone would publish it.
And then when they started to sell it, I thought, well, okay, the reviewers like it.
That's cool.
But reviewers are, you know, usually really smart people and really well-read people.
And I thought, okay, well, they get it.
That's really neat.
But when they started printing the paperback and when the paperback started selling, I'm lost.
I was like, who's reading this?
I'm fascinated.
Yeah, I've been getting mail and stuff.
And how have the signings been?
Have they been good?
Yeah, they have been.
And I'm so flabbergasted.
I mean, I'm happy, I'm thrilled, but it seemed like such a kind of private interest.
It's very startling.
But, I mean, you must feel this about your book, too.
Didn't you ever feel that this was kind of a private passion and that there was a small world of people who might read it, but 50,000 copies tell me you're not surprised to listen.
I'm sure.
I know, I think it's kind of like a... I know, basically, yeah.
Um...
I'll get the years all wrong.
You'll have to check it.
But the big scandal at Union sometime in the last 15 or 20 years, they had one of the elephant folios.
There were five.
Yeah.
They had all five?
They had one.
No, I thought you meant there were five in the country or something.
No, there were five volumes.
I don't think they had all five.
But whatever they had, and it wasn't for them a huge deal.
I guess it's worth like a million dollars or something.
And somebody stole it out of the Union College Library.
No, it was recovered somehow.
I didn't follow this, but I remember it was in the New York Times, and there was all these papers and tracking of the guy, and somehow they got it back, but I can't tell you any details.
What interested me about my guy is that he stole, because he loved the books.
That's what I liked about the story.
He was in love.
He stole them to keep them.
Well, there was a mafia guy that spoke to him.
So you're working on another novel, a novel?
No.
That's the one I thought would be the companion novel, The Ship Fever, and it wasn't.
But it's set just a couple years after the novella, and one of the minor characters in the novella is a minor character in this book.
And it's about a mid-19th century naturalist who's based in Philadelphia on an Arctic exploring expedition.
Do you have a title for it?
At the moment it's called The Voyage of the Narwhal.
How do you spell Narwhal?
N-A-R-W-H-A-L.
W-A-H-L.
No, W-H-A-L.
W-H-A-L.
If you have a...
Projected completion date?
Maybe might finish it this year and forever get home or not.
Okay.
I asked you when you're writing, when you're writing, please yourself.
You don't have any kind of an ideal reader.
No, I write for myself, a little bit for my husband, who's a good reader, and...
Another way that I'm very lucky, I have a very dear writer friend, she's a wonderful writer, lives in an area named Margo Livesey, I don't know if you've
interviewed her.
Anyway, she's terrific, and we've been friends for a long time, and we're sort of writing partners, and she reads all my drafts, and I read all her drafts, and so she's who, when I get sort of enough of a draft of a novel done, I pack it up, and I send it to Margot and say, ooh, what do you think?
What's it going to be?
And she sends hers to me, and we're very lucky to have each other.
So I have this one good reader who helps me a lot.
How do you write?
Do you write on a word processor, or...?
I do know.
I did the first four books in longhand and with a typewriter.
I'd write out a draft in longhand and sort of, you know, make little strings and appendages all over and it would get so messy I couldn't read it and then I'd type it and then I'd start scribbling.
Do you think there's a possibility that the National Book Award had not come along?
Was there a fear that maybe you wouldn't get published at some point down the road?
Yeah, my agent and I talked about it sometimes.
I know this book culture.
I mean, sales and everything.
Even among the University of Fresno.
It's easier if you're a new author.
People want to take a chance on you.
And for a couple books, people will forgive you.
But...
You know, this is my fifth book, and it was going to be my fifth book that didn't sell for Shed.
You'll have to edit that out.
And I do know people now, extremely good writers.
You know, along about the time you get a fifth or sixth or seventh book and you're not selling, people are really tired of you.
They can get all the numbers now from the computers.
And I was used to not making any money from it and making other arrangements.
I was sort of okay with it, but it did occur to me that at some point I'm just going to be so badly poisoned, nobody's going to publish me again.
So there was never a commercial motivation.
And I'm sure that probably continues to be the case.
Regrettably, it's true.
I write because it makes me happy.
Oh, that's Richard Gates, which I love.
He's a wonderful writer.
Oh, God, he's fabulous.
He's fabulous.
Revolutionary wrote.
It's just...
He was great.
He used to hang out at the crossroads in Boston.
Thank you.
And I used to say, actually, once, yeah, because he used to be moan.
Nobody tried to do it.
He said, believe me, if I knew how to write a bestseller, I'd do it in a minute.
Tell me how to do it.
I haven't got a clue what he said.
You know?
You know, if you're not that kind of person, people would say that to me, too.
They'd say, well, why don't you just write one commercial book and you can live off of it?
And it's like, you think I know how?
I have no idea.
I write as well as I can and I put my whole stuff into it.
And that's what I can do.
I can't do anything.
It must be just so gratifying, though, to have this kind of obligation.
I don't know.
It's actually kind of scary.
I mean, it is really gratifying, but...
I still, I wake up every morning and think, oh my God, they made a mistake and they're going to realize it today.
I can't take it back.
Were you surprised when you were named?
I heard that you actually almost fell down.
Yeah, I did.
I spit food across the table.
Come on.
Well, they had, it was so funny.
You know their ballroom at the Waldorf Astoria?
It's so big.
It's the size of a football field.
And when we walked in, I was with Carol, my editor, and my husband, and my agent, and a couple of people from Norton.
And we had physically the last room on the table.
We're like, the back wall's here.
And we're here.
And there's the football field.
And far away, Calvin Trillin's, like, just big.
And we thought, well, that's cool.
You know, the winners should be up near the front where they can get to the stage.
And we looked at the table.
We thought, yeah, we knew that.
And so we'll have a seat dinner.
It'll be good.
Yeah.
So we're eating dinner, and, you know, they do the poetry, and they do the non-fiction, and they do the young people.
And Catherine Harrison got up a little bit, and she said shit fever, and I did.
I spit food, and then it took me like an hour to walk to the stage.
It was just so far away.
And I was so terrified.
She was so gracious to your, to the other nominee.
I wasn't gracious, that was just true.
Those are wonderful books, I mean.
They're wonderful books.
I've known Ron for years.
I think he's an incredibly good writer, and Stephen Milhazer I had never been lucky enough to meet, but I teach his work all the time, and I learn to write in part by reading him.
Of course, I teach very part-time in low-residency MFA programs.
a pretty debilitating fear of public speaking, so I can't really teach in a classroom.
Here you go.
Thank you.
Really?
I've given 36 talks now.
Love that.
This is your first book tour, right?
Yes, my first one ever.
Did you ever think that you'd have a book tour?
No, no, no, no.
I mean, I'm incredibly grateful, of course, for them doing it.
They've done a wonderful job.
It's also very hard for me because...
This is not like a little fear of public speaking.
You know, I've read every night since last Thursday, and it's just really hard for me.
I get really sick.
And what generally do you read?
I've been reading different things.
I read The Literal Zone a couple times, and I read The English People last night, and I've read once a sort of set of excerpts from Ship Fever, which I guess is what I'll do tonight.
So that part's hard.
This part's not, you know, just talking to people one-on-one.
It's great.
I like that.
But since I'm a little girl, having to stand up in front of people and talk is madness.
Have you had pretty good coverage of your whole paper?
There was a lot right after the award.
They were very startled, too, because a lot of people in Rochester didn't even know I rode.
I'm just like the tall lady with the gray hair who walks the dog every day.
Nobody knew what I did.
What kind of dog did that mean?
It's a big pound month, about 90 pounds.
And also, you know, there's that thing that happens in smaller cities where it's hard for them to believe sometimes that
that something good could, you know, nationally good could happen to them.
So they were very surprised as well.
I was just curious because I...